# Connectionless transmission: User Datagram Protocol (UDP)

Function: Header of a transport protocol is include at least:

- source and destination port
- a length specification of user data

This allows one application to send for each individual packet:

- The receiver (IP address)
- Specify the receiving application (protocol and destination port)

Problems: since the segments are sent stateless independently of each other and from the perspective of the transport layer, it can not be guaranteed that

- Segments reach the receiver (packets may be lost)
- The receiver receives the segments in the correct order (packets are routed independently)

Consequently, one speaks of an unsecured, connectionless or message-oriented communication (Not to be confused with message-oriented transmission on Layer 2)

Hints:

- Connectionless POSIX sockets are identified by the preprocessor marco `SOCK_DGRAM`
- `DGRAM` stands for datagram, which simply means a message of a certain length that is to be transmitted as a unit from the perspective of the transport layer.

The User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is one of the two most commonly used transport protocols in the world Internet. It offers

- Unsecured and message-oriented transmission
- transfer at low overhead

```
UDP-Header

        0 ~ 15          16 ~ 31
   +--------------+------------------+
0B |  Source port | Destination port |
   +--------------+------------------+
4B |    Length    |     Checksum     |
   +--------------+------------------+
   |            Data                 |
```

- Length specifies the length of headers and data in multiples of bytes
- The checksum covers headers and data
- Use of the UDP checksum is optional with IPv4, but is required for IPv6
- If not used, the field is set to 0
- If used, a pseudo-header is used for the calculation (a kind of "default-IP-header" which is used only to calculate the check sum). It contains the following fields of the IP header: source and destination IP address, an 8-bit field with zeros, protocol ID and length of UDP datagram.

Advantages of UDP:

- Low overhead
- No delay due to connection setup or retransmits and reordering of segments
- Well suited for read-time applications (Voice over IP, online games) if occasional packet loss can be accepted
- No influence on the data rate due to flow and congestion control mechanisms

Disadvantages of UDP:

- No assurance of any kind of quality of service (arbitraily high error rate)
- Datagrams can be delivered out-of-order (e.g. using multiple paths to a destination)
- No flow control (fask transmitter may overwhelm slow receiver)
- No congestion control mechanisms (overload in the network leads to high loss rates)

Where is UDP used?

UDP is used everywhere:

- occasional loss of datagrams is tolerable or is compensated by higher layers
- a time-consuming connection setup, as required in other transport protocols, is intolerable.

Examples:

- Name resolution using Domain Name System (DNS)
- DNS is used to translate "web addresses" such as `changkun.de` into IP addresses
- Before name resolution is not completed, no connection to the destination can be established (cause a time delay).
- Traffic with real-time requirements
- Flow and congestion contrl mechanisms can introduce non-deterministic latencies.
- Arriving too late often has no relevance here.
- Google's QUIC
- Experimental protocol for accelerating TLS1.3 encrypted connections.
- Missing mechanisms of UDP are implemented at the application layer.

