# Case Studies

## UDP Chat

Goals:

- An application that work simultaneously bwteen client and server (P2P model)
- Only 1: one connection, no group chats


```

            PC ---------------------------- Cloud -------------------- PC
./chat 6112 127.0.0.1 7000                                ./chat 7000 127.0.0.1 6122 
hello!                          ---------------------->   127.0.0.1:6122 >> Hello!
127.0.0.1:7000 >> How are you?  <----------------------   How are you?

```

We need: A Socket that

- On which outgoing messages are send (to destination IP and port)
- Bound to the local IP(s) and port number to receive messages


Important structs

- struct `socketaddr_in`: contains address family (`AF_INET` or `AF_INET6`), port number and IP address

```c
struct sockaddr_in {
    __kernel_sa_family_t sin_family; /* Address family */ 
    __be16               sin_port;   /* Port number */ 
    struct in_addr       sin_addr;   /* Internet address */

    /* Pad to size of struct sockaddr. */
    unsigned char __pad[__SOCK_SIZE__ - sizeof(short int)
         - sizeof(unsigned short int) - sizeof(struct in_addr)];
};
```

`struct in_addr`: Represents and IPv4 address in Network Byte Order

```c
struct in_addr {
    __be32 s_addr;
};
```

`struct sockaddr`: Address structure that leaves the type of socket open (generalized `sockaddr_in` and `sock_addr_un`)

```c
struct sockaddr {
    sa_family_t     sa_family;   /* address family, AF_xxx */
    char            sa_data[14]; /* 14 bytes of protocol address */
};
```

Initialize `sockaddr` struct:

```c
struct sockaddr_in local;
local.sin_family      = AF_INET;     // Address families
local.sin_port        = htons(port); // application specified port
local.sin_addr.s_addr = INADDR_ANY;  // receive from all address
```

- `AF_INET` specifies IPv4 (alternatives are `AF_INET6` and `AF_UNIX` for instance)
- The 16-bit port number on which incoming packets are expected must be in Network Byte Order be added (hence `htons()` like "host to network short")
- `INADDR_ANY` corresponds to the unspecified IPv4 address 0.0.0.0, which means data is expected on all IP addresses or interfaces.

Sockets

- From the perspective of OS, a socket is nothing more than a file descriptor, i.e. an integer.
- Sockets are the interface bwtween a program and operating system

A socket for our program:

- `socket()` creates a new socket of the specified type:
  + `AF_INET` specifies an IPv4 socket.
  + `SOCK_DGRAM` indicates that is should be a datagram-oriented socket
  + `IPPROTO_UDP` specifies the transport protocol
  + Return value is the socket descriptor or -1 if an error occurs

```c
int sd;
if (0 > (sd = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_DGRAM, IPPROTO_UDP))) {
    perror("socket() failed");
    exit(1);
}
```

The socket still has to get an address:

- `bind()` associates a fieldscriptor with the associated address information
- The cast in struct `sockaddr` is necessary because `bind()` doesn't just work with struct `sockaddr_in`
- Return value is 0 on success and -1 on errors

```c
if (0 > bind(sd, (struct sockaddr *)&local, sizeof(local))) {
    perror("bind() failed");
    exit(1);
}
```

- The socket created in this way can be used to receive but also to send data.
- When sending, the port number specified in the `struct sockaddr` is used as the source port.
- The sender IP decides on the basis of the interface used for sending, if any addresses were specified by means of `INADDR_ANY`

How does the program notice when new data arrives?

- `read()` on the socket
  + `read()` blocks until something comes up.
  + with a single process or thread, we can only monitor a single socket.
  + the program could not even receive data and (more or less) simultaneously on the keyboard input.
- Using `select()` or `pselect()`:
  + we pack all the file descriptor to the monitored into `fd_set`.
  + `select()` modifies the passed `fd_set` so that it contains exactly the file descriptor as soon as something happends
  + The return value of `select()` is the number of file descriptors that have become available or -1 if an error occurs.
- For a large number of file descriptors, `select()` may become inefficient. `epoll()` offers advanced option.

A program using `select()`:

```c
fd_set rfds ,rfd;
FD_ZERO(&rfds);
FD_SET(STDIN_FILENO ,&rfds);
FD_SET(sd,&rfds);
maxfd = MAX(sd,STDIN_FILENO);

for (;;) {
    rfd = rfds;
    if (0 > select(maxfd+1,&rfd,NULL,NULL,NULL)) { 
        perror("select() failed");
        exit(1);
    }
    (...)
}
```

- `rfds` is the "read file descriptor set" that contains all file descriptors that `select()` should monitor
- `maxfd` is the numerically largest file descriptor that `select()` should monitor.
- `select()` itself returns the number of file descriptor (or -1 for an error)
- The transferred descriptor set is modified so that it only contains the active file descriptors (which is why `rfd` must always be restored at the beginning of the loop)


Receiving data

- `select()` will tell us as soon as something interesting happens.
- We need to determine which of the file descriptor is ready.
- In the case of standard input (STDIN), we can simply use `fgets()` to read the input
- If the file descriptor of the socket is ready, we could use `read()` or `recv()`. But then we will never know who has sent us something for connectionless transport protocols like UDP.
- We can use `recvfrom()` better: here we can pass and write a `struct sockaddr_in` into `recvfrom()` if we received something

A `recvfrom()` program:

```c
for (;;) {
    (...)
    if (FD_ISSET(ds,&rfd)) {
        len = recvfrom(sd, buffer, BUFFLEN-1, 0, (struct sockaddr*)&form, &slen);
        if (0 > len) {
            perror("recvfrom() failed")
            exit(1)
        }
        fprintf(stdout, "%s:%d >> %s\n", inet_ntoa(from.sin_addr), ntohs(from.sin_port), buffer);
    }
    (...)
}
```

Sending data

- To send data, we must use `sendto()` with connectionless protocols.
- To do this, you must pass a struct `sockaddr_in` that says who the recipient should be.
- A simple `write()` does not work because the OS then doesn't know send data to whom.

```c
for (;;) {
    (...)
    if (FD_ISSET(STDIN_FILENO, &rfd)) {
        if (NULL == (s=fgets(buffer, BUFFLEN, stdin)))
            continue;
        len = sendto(sd, buffer, strlen(buffer, 0,
                         (struct sockaddr *)&remote, sizeof(remote)));
        if (0 > len) {
            perror("sendto() failed");
            exit(1);
        }
    }
    (...)
}
```

- Check [Linux kernel coding style](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/process/coding-style.rst) if you are not happy with the indentations

## TCP Chat

We want:

- A server that supports N client connections simultaneously
- If a client sends a message to the server, it should be forwarded to all other clients
- This corresponds to a chat room
- Server and client are now two different programs


The client looks similar to our UDP chat:

```c
remote.sin_family      = AF_INET;
remote.sin_port        = htons(SERVERPORT);
remote.sin_addr.s_addr = inet_addr(SERVERIP);

if (0 > (sd=socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, IPPROTO_TCP))) {
    perror("socket() failed");
    exit(1);
}
if (0 > connect(sd, (struct sockaddr *)&remote, sizeof(remote))) {
    perror("connect() failed");
    exit(1);
}
```

- Socket type is now `SOCK_STREAM` and the `IPPROTO_TCP` protocol.
- If we do not want to specify our sender port as a client (but from the operating system we want to renounce a `bind()`).
- In any case, we now need a `connect()` to connect to the server.
- Of course, `connect()` must be told who we want to connect to (--> `struct sockaddr_in`)

Almost done, all that's missing is sending and receiving messages:

```c
(...)
for (;;) {
    rfd = rfds;
    if (0 > select(maxfd + 1, &rfd, NULL, NULL, NULL)) {
        perror("select() failed");
        exit(1);
    }
    if (FD_ISSET(STDIN_FILENO, &rfd)) {
        if (NULL == (s = fgets(buffer, sizeof(buffer)-1, stdin))) continue;
        if (0 >= (len=send(sd, buffer, MIN(strlen(buffer)+1, BUFFLEN), 0))) {
            perror("send() failed");
            exit(-1);
        }
    }
    if (FD_ISSET(sd, &rfd)) {
        if (0 >= (len=recv(sd, buffer, BUFFLEN-1, 0))) { (...) }
        fprintf(stdout, ">> %s\n", buffer);
    }
}
```

Since senders and receivers are known, `send()` or `recv()` is sufficient instead of `sendto()` or `recvfrom()`.

```c
if (0 > (sd = socket(AF_INET , SOCK_STREAM , IPPROTO_TCP))) {
    perror("socket() failed");
}
local.sin_family = AF_INET;
local.sin_port = htons(port);
local.sin_addr.s_addr = INADDR_ANY;

if (0 > bind(sd, (struct sockaddr *)&local, sizeof(local))) {
    perror("bind() failed");
    exit(-1);
}
if (0 > listen(sd, MAXCLIENTS)) {
    perror("listen() failed")
    exit(-1);
}
```

`listen()` marks the socket as passive. This means that no data is sent or received via this socket, but instead incoming connections are expected on this socket.

When a client connects, the connection must be accepted:

```c
for (;;) {
    rfd = rfds;
    if (0 > select(maxfd + 1, &rfd, NULL, NULL, NULL)) {
        perror("select() failed");
        exit(1);
    }
    if (FD_ISSET(sd, &rfd)) {
        if (0 > (csd = accept(sd, (struct sockaddr *)&safrom, &slen))) {
            perror("accept() failed");
            exit(-1);
        }
        cl_add(&cl, csd, safrom); // Move client to a list
        FD_SET(csd, &rfds);
        maxfd = MAX(maxfd, csd);
    }
    (...)
}
```

- `select()` responds when a connection is displayed on the server socket `sd`.
- `accept()` accepts the connection and creates a new socket that connection to the client represents.
- The server socket remains active, it could still come a client.
- the new socket must be included in the set of file descriptors to be monitored if the client sends us something.

If a client sends us something, we have to 

- find the right socket
- receive the data from the client and then
- forward the received message to all other clients

The clients are managed in a meaningful way in a list. If you have found the right socket, you can receive and send by `recv()` and `send()`.

```c
for (;;) {
    (...)
    len = recv(client.sd, inbuff, BUFFLEN, 0);
    (...)
    len = send(client.sd, outbuff, strlen(outbuff), 0);
    (...)
}
```

- In principle, instead of `recv()` and `send()`, you can also use the syscalls `read()` and `write()` because in contrast to the connectionless UDP, the sender and receiver are already fixed.
- `recv()` and `send()` are to be preferred, as certain exceptions (e.g. connection lost) are meaningfully signaled.

With these code fragments can be relatively quickly

- implement a simple TCP-based relay chat, the
- in the functional scope corresponds to the UDP-based Relay Chat implemented yesterday in the lecture.

Question:

- What weaknesses / problems of yesterday's chat, we will not have anymore?
- What new problems will we get now?

A server implementation of the TCP chat available that offers interesting additional features such as

- flood protection (spammers are thrown out) and
- supports time-limited banning of clients based on their IP address.
